# A Primer on Next Generation Matrix Models

A Next Generation Matrix model is a way to model the expected number of infections generated by a single infected individual in different groups or categories of the population per unit time. The Next Generation Matrix (here after referred to as NGM) encodes this information. NGM models are an effective way to model average dynamics during the early growth phase of an epidemic in the limit of the disease-free equilibrium.

The NGM is akin to the branching process concept of an offspring distribution generated by each individual. In this context, the NGM represents the expected value of the offspring distribution or distribution of infections caused in a group from an individual in another group.

(some references to Diekmann and Keeling & Rohani)

[Use of NGM as a model](#use-of-ngm-as-a-model)

[Interpretation of matrix elements](#interpretation-of-matrix-elements)

[Explanatory comma: Frequency vs Density dependent models](#explanatory-comma-frequency-vs-density-dependent-models)


[Derivation from infectious disease dynamics](#derivation-from-infectious-disease-dynamics)

[The F and M matrix](#the-f-and-m-matrix)

[Contact matrices](#contact-matrices)

[Conditions and limitations](#conditions-and-limitations)

[Building up from the SIR model](#building-up-from-the-sir-model)

[Formal definition](#formal-definition)

[When population sizes are different](#when-population-sizes-are-different)

[When distributions of population groups vary](#when-distributions-of-population-groups-vary)

## Use of NGM as a model
Most commonly, Next Generation Matrix models are used as an analytical tool to estimate the basic reproduction number $R_0$, an epidemiological quantity that can help provide insight about disease dynamics in outbreaks and how to design interventions to control or mitigate them, from the NGM.

As a result, most modelers familiar with NGMs have experience with using them as an analytical tool rather than a simulation tool.

NGMs can also be used to approximately model the ODEs for the subsystem of infected states, where we assume the unit of time is the infectious period.




## Interpretation of matrix elements

### Explanatory comma: Frequency vs Density dependent models

## Derivation from infectious disease dynamics

### The F and M matrix

## Contact matrices

## Conditions and limitations

## Building up from the SIR model
deriving NGM for a simple SIR

## Formal definition

## When population sizes are different

## When distributions of population groups vary
